---
layout: page
title: International Publications

---

**Mispricing in the odd lots market in Brazil. North American Journal of Economics and Finance. Volume 42, November 2017, Pages 618-628**. [link](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1062940817302127)

We study the case of mispricing in the odd lots equity market in Brazil. Contrary to expectation, odd lot investors are paying higher prices than round lot investors. The pricing difference between markets is affected by market returns, volatility and spreads. Our main hypothesis is that; once the assets traded in the odd lot market are more illiquid than their counterparts, the mispricing is driven by liquidity factors. Additionally, we show that the mispricing yields an arbitrage opportunity that is not being traded away in the Brazilian market. Therefore, we propose regulators to review the market design for odd lots in Brazil. We argue that reducing the minimal trading unit in the round lots market would benefit investors.


**Can we predict the financial markets based on Google's search queries? Journal of Forecasting (Print),  V. 36, Issue 4** [link](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/for.2446/abstract).

In this paper we look into the interaction of Google's search queries and several aspects of international equity markets. Using a novel methodology for selecting words and a VAR modeling approach, we study whether the search queries of finance-related words can have an impact on returns, volatility of returns, and traded volume in four different English-speaking countries. We identify several words whose search frequency is associated with changes in the dependent variables. In particular, we find that increases in search queries including the word {\it stock} predict increased volatility and decreased index returns over the next week. On top of that, we investigate the performance of a market-timing strategy based on the search frequency of this word and benchmark it against random words from the Word-Net database and a naive buy-and-hold strategy. The results of this empirical application are positive and particularly stronger during the global crisis of 2009.


Perlin, M., Santos, A., Imasato, T., Borenstein, D., Da Silva, S. (2017) The Brazilian scientific output published in journals: A study based on a large CV database. Journal of Informetrics, V. 11, Issue 1 [link]

We assemble a massive sample of 180,000 CVs of Brazilian academic researchers of all disciplines from the Lattes platform. From the CVs we gather information on key variables that possibly explain the quantity and impact of their output published in journals: gender, PhD origin (domestic or foreign), time taken for finishing a PhD program, and number of years involved in research since PhD completion. Researcher productivity is gauged by three metrics: average SCImago Journal Rank impact factor, average points from Qualis (which is a Brazilian domestic metrics that includes domestic journals), and average number of journal publications per year after PhD completion. Taken together, we find males are more productive in terms of quantity of publications, but the effect of gender in terms of quality is mixed for individual groups of subject areas. Holding a PhD from abroad increases the chance for a researcher to publish in journals of higher impact, whereas domestic PhDs publish more articles, but in journals of less impact. Thus, there is a trade-off between research impact and quantity. We also find that the more years a researcher takes to finish his or her doctorate, the more likely he or she will publish less thereafter. The data also support the existence of an inverted U-shaped function relating research age and productivity.



De Oliveira, A., Filomena, T., Perlin, M., Lejeune, M., De Macedo, R. (2016) 'A Multistage Stochastic Programming Asset-Liability Management Model - An Application to the Brazilian Pension Fund Industry' Optimization and Engineering [Link].

This paper proposes a multistage stochastic programming approach for the asset-liability management of Brazilian pension funds. We generate asset price scenarios with stochastic differential equations—Geometric Brownian Motion model for stocks and Cox–Ingersoll–Ross model for fixed income securities. Intertemporal solvency regulatory rules for Brazilian pension funds are considered endogenously in the model and enforced with a combinatorial constraint. A VaR probabilistic constraint is incorporated to obtain a positive funding ratio at each time period with high probability. Our approach uses multiple trees to provide a representative characterization of the uncertainty and is not computationally prohibitive. We evaluate the insolvency probability under different initial funding ratios through extensive simulations. The study reveals that the likely decrease of interest rate premiums in the next years will force pension fund managers to significantly change their portfolio strategies. They will have to take more risk in order to deliver the cash flows required to cover the liabilities and satisfy the regulatory constraints.



Perlin, M., Brooks, C., Dufour, A. (2013) ‘On the Performance of the Tick Test’ Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, V. 54, p. 42-50 [Link]

In financial research, the sign of a trade (or identity of trade aggressor) is not always available in the transaction dataset and it can be estimated using a simple set of rules called the tick test. In this paper we investigate the accuracy of the tick test from an analytical perspective by providing a closed formula for the performance of the prediction algorithm. By analyzing the derived equation, we provide formal arguments for the use of the tick test by proving that it is bounded to perform better than chance (50/50) and that the set of rules from the tick test provides an unbiased estimator of the trade signs. On the empirical side of the research, we compare the values from the analytical formula against the empirical performance of the tick test for fifteen heavily traded stocks in the Brazilian equity market. The results show that the formula is quite realistic in assessing the accuracy of the prediction algorithm in a real data situation.



Perlin, M., Schanz, J. (2011) ‘System-Wide liquidity risk in the UK’s large-value payment system: an empirical analysis’ Bank of England Working Paper Series. [Link]

When settling their own liabilities and those of their clients, settlement banks rely on incoming payments to fund a part of their outgoing payments. We investigate their behaviour in CHAPS, the United Kingdom’s large-value payment system. Our estimates suggest that in normal times, banks increase their payment outflows when their liquidity is above target and immediately following the receipt of payments. We use these estimates to determine the robustness of this payment system to two hypothetical behavioural changes. In the first, a single bank stops sending payments, perhaps because of an operational problem. In the second, it pays out exactly what it previously received, relying exclusively on the liquidity provided by other system members. Using the observed uncertainty around our estimated behavioural equations, we derive probabilistic statements about the time at which the bank’s counterparties would run out of liquidity if they followed their estimated normal-time behaviour.



Perlin, M. (2009) 'Evaluation of pairs-trading strategy at the Brazilian financial market' Journal of Derivatives & Hedge Funds, v. 15, 122–136. [Link]

Pairs-trading is a popular trading strategy that tries to take advantage of market inefficiencies in order to obtain profit. The idea is simple: find two stocks that move together and take long/short positions when they diverge abnormally, hoping that the prices will converge in the future. From the academic point of view of weak market efficiency theory, pairs-trading strategy should not present positive performance, as, according to it, the actual price of a stock reflects its past trading data, including historical prices. This leaves us with a question: does pairs-trading strategy present positive performance for the Brazilian market? The main objective of this research is to verify the performance and risk of pairs-trading in the Brazilian financial market for different frequencies of the database: daily, weekly and monthly prices for the same time period. The main conclusion of this simulation is that pairs-trading strategy was a profitable and market-neutral strategy at the Brazilian market. Such profitability was consistent over a region of the strategy's parameters. The best results were found for the highest frequency (daily), which is an intuitive result.
